docs: add migration guides and tutorial (#999)
data-apis/array-api: spec/draft/migration_guide.md

page.

There, each function, constant, and object is described with details
on parameters, return values, and special cases.

### Testing against Array API

There are two main ways to test your API for compliance: Either using
`array-api-tests` suite or testing your API manually against `array-api-strict`
reference implementation.

#### Array API Test suite (Recommended)

{ref}`array-api-tests` is a test suite which verifies that your API
for adhering to the standard. For each function or method it confirms
it's importable, verifies the signature, and generates multiple test
cases with hypothesis package and runs asserts for the outputs.

The setup details are enclosed in the GitHub repository, so here we
cover only the minimal workflow:

1. Install your package, for example in editable mode.
2. Clone `array-api-tests`, and set `ARRAY_API_TESTS_MODULE` environment
   variable to your package import name.
3. Inside the `array-api-tests` directory run `pytest` command. There are
   multiple useful options delivered by the test suite, a few worth mentioning:
   - `--max-examples=2` - maximal number of test cases to generate by the

>      hypothesis. This allows you to balance between execution time of the test

Reviewer: Minor: add a link to https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ + a couple of sentensies to explicitly state that hypothesis generates this many examples, where each example is a valid combination of inputs; and that the recommendation is to use as many examples as reasonable for the time budget.

Author: Done

     option is to skip these for the time being.

We strongly advise you to embed this setup in your CI as well. This will allow
you to monitor the coverage live, and make sure new changes don't break existing
API. For a reference here's a [NumPy Array API Tests CI setup](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/581d10f43b539a189a2d37856e5130464de9e5f6/.github/workflows/linux.yml#L296).

#### Array API Strict

A simpler, and more manual, way of testing the Array API coverage is to
run your API calls along with {ref}`array-api-strict` Python implementation.

This way you can ensure the outputs coming from your API match the minimal
reference implementation, but bare in mind you need to write the tests cases
yourself, so you need to also take into account the edge cases as well.

(array-consumers)=

## Array Consumers

For array consumers the main premise is keep in mind that your **array
manipulation operations should not lock in for a particular array producing
library**. For instance, if you use NumPy for arrays, then your code could
contain:

```python
import numpy as np

# ...
b = np.full(shape, val, dtype=dtype) @ a
c = np.mean(a, axis=0)

> return np.dot(c, b)

Reviewer: Nit, optional: are you deliberately showing the transformation from `np.dot` to a spec-compliant `xp.tensordot` below? Otherwise at least one reader (me) stops here and wonders about a subtle difference between a matmul two lines above and  `np.dot` here.

Author: Yes, I added a note that `dot` is not present in the Array API and that this time we use `tensordot` instead.

Reviewer 2: Why tensordot and not vecdot?

Author: In general I wanted to show a case where a given function isn't present in the standard and we need to switch to something else. The code sample is small enough that you can't tell which one is the right choice: assuming that `c` and `b` are rank 2 or higher then `tensordot(..., axes=1)` is closer to `dot(...)` (only the selection of `b` axis is different between them) than to `vecdot`, which performs only vector product.

If we want to be strict in this code example I can make it unambiguous.

Reviewer 2: May be worth more explicitly spelling what you describe above out.

Author: Sure - I'll make an assumption about `c` and `b` in the text explaining the code snippet.

(migration-guide)=

# Migration Guide

> This page is meant to help migrate your codebase to an Array API compliant

Reviewer 3: here and throughout (maybe dropping 'standard' makes sense in some cases, but see https://github.com/data-apis/array-api/discussions/778 )

```suggestion
This page is meant to help migrate your codebase to an array API standard compliant
```

Author: done

> implementation. The guide is divided into two parts and, depending on your

Reviewer 3: I think this should be changed since there are actually three parts, the first being `Ecosystem`

Author: Good point. done

> implementation. The guide is divided into two parts and, depending on your
> exact use-case, you should look thoroughly into at least one of them.

Reviewer 3: nit, seems unnecessary to me
```suggestion
implementation. The guide is divided into two parts.
```

Author: done

The first part is dedicated for {ref}`array-producers`. If your library

> mimics, for example, NumPy's or Dask's functionality, then you can find in

Reviewer 3: minor nit, Dask is probably a strange choice here since itself is quite firmly mimicking NumPy. Maybe PyTorch would be a better example of where the standard took influence to differ from (historical) NumPy

Author: done

the first part additional instructions and guidance on how to ensure
downstream users can easily pick your solution as an array provider for
their system/algorithm.

The second part delves into details for Array API compatibility for
{ref}`array-consumers`. This pertains to any software that performs
multidimensional array manipulation in Python, such as may be found in
scikit-learn, SciPy, or statsmodels. If your software relies on a certain
array producing library, such as NumPy or JAX, then you can use the second
part to learn how to make it library agnostic and interchange array

> namespaces with significantly less friction.

Reviewer 3: is "interchange array namespaces" really what the second part is helping with? To me it seems focused on making functions agnostic

Author: Ability to interchange namespaces is the result of making functions agnostic. We don't make functions agnostic for its own sake, but rather to be able to switch from e.g. NumPy to PyTorch. 
So to make it clear:
```
...you can use the second part to learn how to make it
library agnostic and, as a result, interchange
array namespaces with significantly less friction.
```

Reviewer 3: ah maybe we are thinking of 'interchange' differently, I was thinking of e.g. in-memory interchange like DLPack.

Author: ah, what I had in mind was the concept of plain replacing namespaces e.g.:
```
xp = np if ... else torch
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what words I would use to communicate that clearly...

## Ecosystem

Apart from the documented standard, the Array API ecosystem also provides
a set of tools and packages to help you with the migration process:

(array-api-compat)=

> ### Array API Compat

Reviewer 3: I think this is the first I have seen where we refer to these names with capitalisation and spaces? https://data-apis.org/array-api-extra/ for example deliberately keeps the styling lower-case and with hyphens. Especially since these libraries are developer-facing, I think it makes sense to keep the style of names consistent with how they are distributed as packages.

Author: done

GitHub: [array-api-compat](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat)

User group: Array Consumers

Although NumPy, Dask, CuPy, and PyTorch support the Array API Standard, there
are still some corner cases where their behavior diverges from the standard.

> `array-api-compat` provides a compatibility layer to cover these cases.

Reviewer 3: I think this is false and conflicts with https://data-apis.org/array-api/draft/purpose_and_scope.html#conformance. Sure, it's unreasonable to require _100%_ conformance to say that a library 'supports the standard', but especially in the cases of Dask and PyTorch there are places where array-api-compat still has to do significant work to add missing support

Author: Right - I mentioned that `array-api-compat` provides support for an additional subset of these corner cases.

This is also accompanied by a few utility functions for easier introspection
into array objects. As an array consumer, you can still rely on the original
API while having access to the standard compatible one.

(array-api-strict)=

### Array API Strict

GitHub: [array-api-strict](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict)

> User group: Array Consumers, Array Producers (for testing)

Reviewer 3: see other comment on the inclusion of array producers here

Author: removed

`array-api-strict` is a library that provides a strict and minimal
implementation of the Array API Standard. For array producers, it is designed
to be used as a reference implementation for testing and development purposes.
You can compare your API calls with `array-api-strict` counterparts and
ensure that your library is fully compliant with the standard and can

> serve as a reliable reference for other developers in the ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: I would probably omit this part. The primary source of truth is the standard, with the second being array-api-tests. I don't think array-api-strict provides a particularly useful way to "ensure that your library is fully compliant", aside from comparing every permutation of argument combinations on all functions.

Do any of the libraries adopting the standard actually have infrastructure that compares results against array-api-strict? I was under the assumption that they all just use array-api-tests. (The exception to that is libraries which are inherently both consumers and producers, like https://mdhaber.github.io/marray/intro.html, but I don't think such libraries are the target audience of this doc.)

EDIT: ahh, I see now below the section on testing against array-api-strict for producers. Yeah, especially since that is marked as not the recommended way, I think it is best to omit it in this section here. Makes sense to point out to producers in their section that it is something that might be worth doing, but I don't think it should be included in the description of array-api-strict's purpose.

Author: all agree - done!

For consumers, you can use `array-api-strict` during the development as an

> array provider to ensure your code uses API compliant with the standard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
array provider to ensure your code uses APIs compliant with the standard.
```

> array provider to ensure your code uses APIs compliant with the standard.

Reviewer 3: I would probably be explicit about parametrising tests with it as an array namespace, see https://lucascolley.github.io/talks/pydata-paris-25-array-api/#/5/10. 'using during development' is maybe a bit opaque for someone who is new to the standard.

Author: done

(array-api-tests)=

> ### Array API Test

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Array API Tests
```

Author: done

GitHub: [array-api-tests](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-tests)

User group: Array Producers

`array-api-tests` is a collection of tests that can be used to verify the
compliance of your library with the Array API Standard. It includes tests
for array producers, covering a wide range of functionalities and use cases.
By running these tests, you can ensure that your library adheres to the

> standard and can be used with compatible array consumer libraries.

Reviewer 3: yeah this is good! But it sounds strange that we're mentioning multiple different ways to _ensure_ conformance, hence why I think we should remove the mention for array-api-strict. Ensuring once should be enough! (of course, you can never be 100% sure, but I assume we're writing assuming an ideal state of usage and maintenance of the core packages)

Author: Sure, I removed the testing aspect in the description of `array-api-strict`.

> standard and can be used with compatible array consumers libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
standard and can be used with compatible array consumer libraries.
```

(array-api-extra)=

> ### Array API Extra

Reviewer 3: This does not mention tools for lazy backends (https://lucascolley.github.io/talks/pydata-paris-25-array-api/#/5/13) and `xpx.testing` (https://lucascolley.github.io/talks/pydata-paris-25-array-api/#/5/15)

Author: done

GitHub: [array-api-extra](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-extra)

User group: Array Consumers

`array-api-extra` is a collection of additional utilities and tools that are

> missing from the Array API Standard but can be useful for compliant array

Reviewer 3: 'missing' perhaps sounds a bit negative, I'm not sure what I would say instead but this seems to imply that, in an ideal state, everything in array-api-extra would be in the standard itself. I don't think that is true.

Author: changed to `not present in`.

consumers. It includes additional array manipulation and statistical functions.
It is already used by SciPy and scikit-learn.

> The sections below mention when and how to use them.

Reviewer 3: I would move this up above the individual library sections otherwise it looks like this is under the array-api-extra section

Author: I just removed this sentence

(array-producers)=

## Array Producers

For array producers, the central task during the development/migration process
is ensuring that the user-facing API adheres to the Array API Standard.

The complete API of the standard is documented in the
[API specification](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/index.html).

There, each function, constant, and object is described with details
on parameters, return values, and special cases.

### Testing against Array API

There are two main ways to test your API for compliance: either using
`array-api-tests` suite or testing your API manually against the
`array-api-strict` reference implementation.

#### Array API Test suite (Recommended)

{ref}`array-api-tests` is a test suite which verifies that your API
adheres to the standard. For each function or method, it confirms
it's importable, verifies the signature, generates multiple test

> cases with [hypothesis](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cases with the [hypothesis](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
```

package, and runs assertions on the outputs.

The setup details are enclosed in the GitHub repository, so here we
cover only the minimal workflow:

> 1. Install your package, for example in editable mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install your package (e.g., in editable mode).
```

> 2. Clone `array-api-tests`, and set `ARRAY_API_TESTS_MODULE` environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Clone `array-api-tests`, and set the `ARRAY_API_TESTS_MODULE` environment
```

   variable to your package import name.

> 3. Inside the `array-api-tests` directory run `pytest` command. There are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Inside the `array-api-tests` directory run the command for running pytest: `pytest`. There are
```

   multiple useful options delivered by the test suite. A few worth mentioning:

>    - `--max-examples=1000` - maximal number of test cases to generate by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `--max-examples=1000` - maximal number of test cases to generate when using
```

     hypothesis. This allows you to balance between execution time of the test
     suite and thoroughness of the testing. It's advised to use as many examples
     as the time buget can fit. Each test case is a random combination of
     possible inputs: the more cases, the higher chance of finding an
     unsupported edge case.
   - With the `--xfails-file` option, you can describe which tests are expected
     to fail. It's impossible to get the whole API perfectly implemented on a
     first try, so tracking what still fails gives you more control over the
     state of your API.

>    - `-o xfail_strict=<bool>` is often used with the previous one. If a test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `-o xfail_strict=<bool>` is often used with the previous option. If a test
```

     expected to fail actually passes (`XPASS`), then you can decide whether
     to ignore that fact or raise it as an error.
   - `--skips-file` for skipping tests. At times, some failing tests might stall
     the execution time of the test suite. In that case, the most convenient
     option is to skip these for the time being.

We strongly advise you to embed this setup in your CI as well. This will allow

> you to monitor the coverage live, and make sure new changes don't break existing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you to continuously monitor Array API coverage, and make sure new changes don't break existing
```

> APIs. For a reference, here's a [NumPy Array API Tests CI setup](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/581d10f43b539a189a2d37856e5130464de9e5f6/.github/workflows/linux.yml#L296).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
APIs. As a reference, see [NumPy's Array API Tests CI setup](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/581d10f43b539a189a2d37856e5130464de9e5f6/.github/workflows/linux.yml#L296).
```

> 

Reviewer 3: If I was a library developer reading this, I would be wishing there was also a link to how to set this up within a Pixi workspace, like https://github.com/mdhaber/mparray/blob/0ef47e008fef92c605f73907436d4c6617419161/pixi.toml#L119-L179

Author: done

#### Array API Strict

> A simpler, and more manual, way of testing the Array API coverage is to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A simpler, and more manual, way of testing Array API coverage is to
```

run your API calls along with the {ref}`array-api-strict` Python implementation.

> This way you can ensure the outputs coming from your API match the minimal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This way, you can ensure that the outputs coming from your API match the minimal
```

reference implementation. Bear in mind, however, that you need to write
the tests cases yourself, so you need to also take into account the edge

> cases as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the tests cases yourself, so you need to also take into account any applicable edge
cases.
```

(array-consumers)=

## Array Consumers

> For array consumers, the main premise is to keep in mind that your **array
> manipulation operations should not lock in for a particular array producing
> library**. For instance, if you use NumPy for arrays, then your code could
> contain:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For array consumers, the main premise is that your **array
manipulation operations should not be specific to one particular array producing
library**. For instance, if your code is specific to NumPy, it might contain:
```

Author: done

```python
import numpy as np

# ...
b = np.full(shape, val, dtype=dtype) @ a
c = np.mean(a, axis=0)
return np.dot(c, b)
```

> The first step should be as simple as assigning `np` namespace to a dedicated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step should be as simple as assigning the `np` namespace to a dedicated
```

> namespace variable. The convention in the ecosystem is to name it `xp`. Then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
namespace variable. The convention used in the ecosystem is to name it `xp`. Then,
```

> making sure that each method and function call is something that Array API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is vital to ensure that each method and function call is something that the Array API
```

> supports is vital. `dot` is present in the NumPy's API but the standard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
supports. For example, `dot` is present in the NumPy's API, but the standard
```

> doesn't support it. For the sake of simplicity let's assume both `c` and `b`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
doesn't support it. For the sake of simplicity, let's assume both `c` and `b`
```

> are `ndim=2`, therefore we select `tensordot` instead - both NumPy and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are `ndim=2`; therefore, we select `tensordot` instead, as both NumPy and the
```

standard define it:

```python
import numpy as np

xp = np

# ...
b = xp.full(shape, val, dtype=dtype) @ a
c = xp.mean(a, axis=0)
return xp.tensordot(c, b, axes=1)
```

> Then replacing one backend with another one should rely on providing a different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point, replacing one backend with another one should only require providing a different
```

> namespace, such as: `xp = torch`, e.g. via environment variable. This can be useful

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
namespace, such as `xp = torch` (e.g., via an environment variable). This can be useful
```

if you're writing a script or in your custom software. The other alternatives are:

- If you are building a library where the backend is determined by input arrays,
  and your function accepts array arguments, then a recommended way is to ask
  your input arrays for a namespace to use: `xp = arr.__array_namespace__()`.
  If the given library doesn't have it, then [`array_api_compat.array_namespace()`](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.array_namespace)

>   should be used instead:

Reviewer 3: I think we should skip the idealism and just recommend `array_namespace()` for now until there are real use-cases with `__array_namespace__()`

Author: But then you always enforce one extra dependency. Does it mean that if you want to work with the array API then `array-api-extra` is always a required dependency?

Reviewer 3: Hmm, I suppose it depends on the target audience. If one just wants to work with NumPy and JAX, then yeah, you can probably avoid the array-api-compat dependency (depending on if you are hitting NumPy edge cases or not) and use `__array_namespace__`. But I think in all other cases you would need `array_namespace` right now?

I'm happy to keep mention of `__array_namespace__`, but I'd hesitate to call it 'a recommended way' right now.

Author: Ok, changed it so `array_namespace` is mentioned first as a recommended option, and later `__array_namespace__` if one wants to avoid extra dependency.

  ```python
  def func(array1, scalar1, scalar2):
    xp = array1.__array_namespace__()  # or array_namespace(array1)
    return xp.arange(scalar1, scalar2) @ array1
  ```
- For a function that accepts scalars and returns arrays, use namespace `xp` as

>   a parameter in the signature. Then enforcing objects to be of type by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  a parameter in the signature. Enforcing objects to have the same type as the
```

>   provided backend can be achieved with `arg1 = xp.asarray(arg1)` for each input:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  provided backend can then be achieved with `arg1 = xp.asarray(arg1)` for each input:
```

  ```python
  def func(s1, s2, xp):

>     return xp.arange(s1, s2)

Reviewer 3: this example isn't particularly compelling, since it is something that is already achievable more easily on the user-side. I think it is worth a sentence stating when this may be worth it (e.g. there may be significant computation that you want to happen native to the array library before returning, https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.fft.fftfreq.html) versus when it probably isn't (e.g. just trivially wrapping a value with `xp.asarray` before return, https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/constants.html)

  ```

If you're relying on NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch, Dask, or JAX then
{ref}`array-api-compat` can come in handy for the transition. The compat layer

> allows you to still rely on your selection of array producing library, while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allows you to still rely on your preferred array producing library, while
```

making sure you're already using standard compatible API. Additionally, it
offers a set of useful utility functions, such as:

- [array_namespace()](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.array_namespace)
  for fetching the namespace based on input arrays.
- [is_array_api_obj()](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.is_array_api_obj)

>   for the introspection whether a given object is Array API compatible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  for inspecting whether a given object is Array API compatible.
```

- [device()](https://data-apis.org/array-api-compat/helper-functions.html#array_api_compat.device)

>   to get a device the array resides on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  for retrieving the device on which an array resides.
```

For now, the migration from a specific library (e.g., NumPy) to a standard
compatible setup requires a manual intervention for each failing API call,

> but, in the future, we plan to provide some automation tools for it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but, in the future, we're hoping to provide tools for automating the migration process.
```
